[SYCL][Docs] Add design for moving to the new offloading model (#8658)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/design/OffloadDesign.md

The fat object in the new model is generated during the host compilation.
The host compilation takes an additional argument which points to the device
binary which will be embedded in the final object.  Generation will be
separated out to allow for potential parallelism during compilation of both the
host and target device binaries.

![Creating the fat object](images/OffloadFatObject.png
 "Fat Object Generation")

*Diagram 2: Fat Object Generation*

### Packager

When dealing with multiple device binaries, an additional step is performed to
package the multiple device binaries before being added to the host object.
This additional step is performed with the `clang-offload-packager` taking
image inputs containing information relating to the target triple,
architecture setting and offloading kind.

The `clang-offload-packager` is run during 'fat object' generation regardless
of the number of device binaries being added to the conglomerate fat object.
The device binaries are contained in what is designated as an ‘Offload Binary’.
These binaries can reside in a variety of binary formats including Bitcode
files, ELF objects, executables and shared objects, COFF objects, archives or

> simply stored as an offload binary.

Author: SPIR-V doesn't look to be supported.  This would need to be added.  As you mentioned below, linking of native/SPIR-V is now possible having the ability to create a SPIR-V based fat object is desired.

> simply stored as an offload binary.

Author: Effectively, it looks like it would just be the SPIR-V device binary embedded in whatever the host object is (device, object, etc) in their respective sections, of course packaged before added to the section.

are working with.  The default device is typically represented in LLVM-IR
which requires an additional link step of the device code before being
wrapped and integrated into the final executable.

To reduce the potential size of the linked device binary, an additional host
link step is performed to gather dependency information when static device
libraries are being compiled.  This information is sent through the
`clang-offload-deps` tool to generate a dependency IR file which is used
during the device link step.

There are multiple device linking steps that also occur.  The first step links
together all of the objects and the required device libraries.  The second is
performed including all of optional device libraries, the static device
libraries and the dependency information that was gathered above.  This link
step is performed with `--only-needed` to streamline the final device binary.

The device libraries that are pulled in during the device link step will need
to be controlled by the `clang-linker-wrapper`.  There are controlling options
that are available to the user which need to be provided to the wrapper to

> understand which device libraries are not desired by the end user.

Author: I don't know how much it is used in practice, but the behavior is controlled by the existing `-fsycl-device-lib=arg`.  so maybe the wording of 'not desired' is incorrect and should be more just a statement of control that is available that can be used.

to create the image.

To support the needed option passing triggered by use of the
`-Xsycl-target-backend` option and implied options based on the optional
device behaviors for AOT compilations for GPU new command line interfaces
are needed to pass along this information.

| Target | Triple        | Offline Tool   | Option for Additional Args |
|--------|---------------|----------------|----------------------------|
| CPU    | spir64_x86_64 | opencl-aot     | `--cpu-tool-arg=<arg>`     |
| GPU    | spir64_gen    | ocloc          | `--gen-tool-arg=<arg>`     |
| FPGA   | spir64_fpga   | aoc/opencl-aot | `--fpga-tool-arg=<arg>`    |

*Table: Ahead of Time Info*

To complete the support needed for the various targets using the
`clang-linker-wrapper` as the main interface, a few additional options will
be needed to communicate from the driver to the tool.  Further details of usage
are given further below.

| Option Name                  | Purpose                                      |
|------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| `--fpga-tool-deps=<arg>`     | Comma separated list of dependency files used for FPGA hardware compiles using `aoc` |

> | `--parallel-link-sycl=<arg>` | Provide the number of parallel jobs that will be used when processing with `llvm-foreach` |

Reviewer: I'm unresolving this conversation: it would actually be great to re-use existing option which specifies "amount" of parallelism which can be used by the tool. There later could be other places which may benefit from parallelization: thinLTO, for example. Also, I assume that at some point we will inline some tools into `clang-linker-wrapper` which would allow to get rid of `llvm-foreach` as well.

I'm not saying that we should use `wrapper-jobs` right away if there are semantic differences which I'm missing, but we should at least leave a note/`TODO` here that we should aim for re-using existing upstream option instead of introducing what seems to be a clone of it.

option to the wrapper, `--cpu-tool-arg=<arg>`

### Integration of the sycl-aspect-filter

### Wrapping of device image

Once the device binary is pulled out of the fat binary, the binary must be
wrapped and provided the needed entry points to be used during execution.  This
is performed by the during the link phase and controlled by the
`clang-linker-wrapper`.

It is expected that the wrap information that is generated to be wrapped
around the device binary will match current wrapping information that is used
for the exiting offload model.  The wrapping in the old model is using the
`clang-offload-wrapper` tool.

### Integration of llvm-foreach

Use of `llvm-foreach` is used frequently during the offloading process.  The
functionality will persist with the new model.  Steps using `llvm-foreach`
have the capability of kicking of the steps in a parallel manner by using the
`-fsycl-max-parallel-link-jobs` option on the command line.  Information
about the parallel jobs will need to be passed through the
`clang-linker-wrapper` to be properly processed.  The option will be named
`--parallel-link-sycl=<arg>` to be consumed and used during `llvm-foreach`

> toolchain events.

Reviewer: We should aim for that in the future, but there could be a caveat: we don't know if all of those tools support multi-threaded environment. For example: the SPIR-V translator has a library API, but I doubt that it provides any guarantees that those APIs can be called in parallel. It could be some hidden global states which may caused problems or some other issues.

I'm not saying that we shouldn't aim for inlining as much as possible into `clang-linker-wrapper` to reduce overheads on I/O and spawning separate processes, but there could be some obstacles on that path with some of the tools.

> toolchain events.

Reviewer 2: Where do the threads come from?  Is `clang-linker-wrapper` currently multi-threaded in its implementation?

> toolchain events.

Reviewer: > Is `clang-linker-wrapper` currently multi-threaded in its implementation?

I don't know for sure, but it has `wrapper-jobs` option which implies some parallelization - I guess it happens somewhere in thinLTO.

> Where do the threads come from?

My assumption that if we want to both _inline_ external tools into `clang-linker-wrapper` and _launch them in parallel_, that will require threads and not separate processes.

> # Implementation design for offloading model

Reviewer 2: Adding a global comment here, so the conversation can be threaded.

It seems like there is a lot of overlap with this design and the change we plan to do for AOT for the [optional kernel features](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/supported/sycl_ext_oneapi_discard_queue_events.asciidoc).  I think this design document should at least describe how those AOT changes will be reflected in this new offload design.  We could still implement them as separate phases if we want, though I suspect it will be easier to do some of the work together.

In particular, I think we should consider adding the following "preparatory work" to this design, which will make the optional kernel features support easier:

* Fully support the interface where specific device names are provided via the `-fsycl-targets` command line option.  Currently, we allow only a single device name like `-fsycl-targets=intel_gpu_pvc`.  We should expand this to allow multiple device names such as `-fsycl-targets=intel_gpu_pvc,intel_gpu_dg1`.

* Currently, we invoke `ocloc` once for all GPU targets.  This should be changed to invoke it separately for each GPU device on the `-fsycl-targets` command line option.

* Currently, the output from `ocloc` (i.e. native code for all GPU targets) is bundled as one offload region whose type is `PI_DEVICE_BINARY_TYPE_NATIVE`.  Now that we invoke `ocloc` separately for each GPU device, will will have a separate offload region for each GPU device named on the `-fsycl-targets` command line option.  We need some more device-specific label for these offload regions other than `PI_DEVICE_BINARY_TYPE_NATIVE`.

* The SYCL runtime needs to be adjusted to find the appropriate offload region for the target device.

I think this will affect the offload design in several ways, but one that comes to mind is the `--gen-tool-arg` option that you propose.  This is probably not granular enough because `clang-linker-wrapper` will invoke `ocloc` several times, once for each GPU device.  Do we need some way to specify different arguments for each invocation?

Author: Good points - current proposal is very singular in nature.  In order to support the multiple targets, this will need to be broken down into meaningful pieces where we can specify an arbitrary number of different devices and given each device, a separate `ocloc` call is performed.  This should also provide a way of passing different additional options to each individual `ocloc` call, effectively enabling support for items like `-Xsycl-target-backend=intel_gpu_pvc <opts>`

The section which contains the offloading data is from the `.llvm.offloading`
section within the `llvm.embedded.object` metadata.

#### Offload Binary

The binary itself can be represented by just an offload binary, not requiring
to be in a section of another binary.  This representation is used for any
kind of device only binary that is created.

#### Archives

Each item in the archive will be extracted and will be individually checked for
the file type, properly performing extraction based on the file types already
listed above.

#### Support of existing fat object format

The current model generates fat objects using the `clang-offload-bundler`
tool.  This tool creates a binary that contains individual sections that are
labeled with `__CLANG_OFFLOAD_BUNDLE__kind-triple`.  This format does not
match the new format as described above.  To enable an ease of transition
from the old model to the new model, support will be added that allows for
support of identifying and extracting device binaries that are using the old
model.

It is expected that all new binaries generated with the updated offloading
model will represent the embedded fat object format, moving away from the

> `clang-offload-bundler` usage.  We will not support a mixing of fat object

Reviewer 3: This could be a problem for users that want to use existing third party libraries with newer libraries. I'm not sure if that's a use case that is worth addressing here.

Author: The ability to read in the older format should allow for the mixing of old and new libraries.  It is not expected to be able to have both old and new format objects in a single archive however.

Reviewer 3: That's the situation I'm slightly worried about if a third party vendor doesn't upgrade the format. Is there a mechanism for warning the user when mixing the two types, and is there a way to upgrade an existing library to the newer format?

Reviewer: Please note that backwards compatibility is not guaranteed to be preserved forever anyway and there are cases when the application has to be anyway recompiled in order to work with newer runtime.

> It is not expected to be able to have both old and new format objects in a single archive however.

@mdtoguchi, I wonder, though, why can't we support that? If we anyway scan each archive member to handle it in accordance with its type, why can't we detect old/new format at that stage and act on it in a correct way? Am I missing something?

Author: We could support, we would need to get down to within the archive level and unbundle/extract on an individual basis there.  Would there be instances where folks would want to use old objects, compile new objects and put them into an archive, or even just adding new objects to an old archive?

Reviewer 3: I think mostly just linking old archives with new archives, but it's a contrived case that we may be able to live without.

the offline compiler will also use unique command lines specific to the tool
to create the image.

To support the needed option passing triggered by use of the
`-Xsycl-target-backend` option and implied options based on the optional
device behaviors for AOT compilations for GPU new command line interfaces
are needed to pass along this information.

| Target | Triple        | Offline Tool   | Option for Additional Args |
|--------|---------------|----------------|----------------------------|
| CPU    | spir64_x86_64 | opencl-aot     | `--cpu-tool-arg=<arg>`     |
| GPU    | spir64_gen    | ocloc          | `--gen-tool-arg=<arg>`     |
| FPGA   | spir64_fpga   | aoc/opencl-aot | `--fpga-tool-arg=<arg>`    |

*Table: Ahead of Time Info*

To complete the support needed for the various targets using the
`clang-linker-wrapper` as the main interface, a few additional options will
be needed to communicate from the driver to the tool.  Further details of usage
are given further below.

| Option Name                  | Purpose                                      |
|------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|

> | `--fpga-tool-deps=<arg>`     | Comma separated list of dependency files used for FPGA hardware compiles using `aoc` |

Reviewer 3: Is this list only ever needed for FPGA compile? Or can it be generalized to something like `--backend-tool-deps` and populated only when necessary?

Author: As I think of this, the dependency file that is generated during the compilation should be added to the final binary before the link is called.  This would mean that this option is not necessary.  It also implies we need to call out the ability to add the dependency file to the fat binary so it can be used during the link/call to aoc.

| `--parallel-link-sycl=<arg>` | Provide the number of parallel jobs that will be used when processing with `llvm-foreach` |
| `--no-sycl-device-lib=<arg>` | Provide the list of device libraries to restrict from linking during device link |

*Table: Additional Options for clang-linker-wrapper*

The `clang-linker-wrapper` provides an existing option named `-wrapper-jobs`
that may be useful for our usage instead of creating a new option specific
to `llvm-foreach` processing.

#### spir64_gen support

Compilation behaviors involving AOT for GPU involve an additional call to
the OpenCL Offline compiler (OCLOC).  This call occurs after the post-link
step performed by sycl-post-link.  Additional options passed by the user
via the `-Xsycl-target-backend=spir64_gen <opts>` command as well as the
implied options set via target options such as `-fsycl-targets=intel_gpu_skl`
will be processed by a new options to the wrapper, `--gen-tool-arg=<arg>`

#### spir64_fpga support

Compilation behaviors involving AOT for FPGA involve an additional call to

> the either `aoc` (for Hardware) or `opencl-aot` (for Simulation).  This call

Reviewer 3: `opencl-aot` is only needed for what we call emulation (x86 emulation of the user kernel). `aoc` is used for both hardware and simulation (cycle-accurate simulation of the generated Verilog code) platforms.

Author: Thanks - I will correct this.

occurs after the post-link step performed by sycl-post-link.  Additional
options passed by the user via the `-Xsycl-target-backend=spir64_fpga <opts>`
command will be processed by a new options to the wrapper,
`--fpga-tool-arg=<arg>`

> The FPGA target also has support for additional generated binaries that

Reviewer 3: I just want to clarify something here. With this new model, it sounds like it's possible to package binaries like aoco, aocr, or aocx into the fat object files that the link stage can pick up, correct? If yes, then I'm not sure if Diagram 1 is exactly right, since it sounds like you may have an "Offline Compile" stage there. Unless you're implying that there could be a AOT compile stage as part of the "Device Compile".

Author: The case of using aocx/aoco/aocr files in object files/archives is not explicitly called out and the diagram is more a reflection of the general AOT compilation case.  The usage of the FPGA specific device types should be spelled out more succinctly.

contain intermediate files specific for FPGA.  These binaries (aoco, aocr and
aocx) can reside in archives and are treated differently than traditional
device binaries.

When using the `-fintelfpga` option to enable AOT for FPGA, there are
additional expectations during the compilation.  Use of the option will enable
debug generation and also generate dependency information.  The dependency
generation should be packaged along with the device binary for use during
the link phase.  If we are not generating an object and performing compilation
directly to the final executable, a new option named `--fpga-tool-deps=<arg>`
will be needed to pass along the name of the dependency files created during
the compile.  The dependency information is only used when compiling for
hardware.

#### spir64_x86_64 support

Compilation behaviors involving AOT for CPU involve an additional call to
`opencl-aot`.  This call occurs after the post-link step performed by
`sycl-post-link`.  Additional options passed by the user via the
`-Xsycl-target-backend=spir64_x86_64 <opts>` command will be processed by a new
option to the wrapper, `--cpu-tool-arg=<arg>`

> ### Integration of the sycl-aspect-filter

Reviewer 2: Did you intend to leave this section empty?

FWIW, I think we will change the "optional kernel features" design, so that we do not need the `sycl-aspect-filter` tool.  Instead, I think `sycl-post-link` can do the filtering itself and emit different LLVM bitcode files for each device when in AOT mode.

Maybe this section should just be deleted?

Author: It was kind of a placeholder, but I didn't do anything with it.  I will remove.

step to produce the final device binary or is wrapped before being linked into
the final executable.

### Ahead Of Time Compilation

The updated offloading model will integrate the Ahead of Time (AOT) compilation
behaviors into the clang-linker-wrapper.  The actions will typically take place
after the device link and post link steps.

Regardless of the AOT target, the flow is similar, only modifying the offline
compiler that is used to create the target device image.  It is expected that
the offline compiler will also use unique command lines specific to the tool
to create the image.

To support the needed option passing triggered by use of the
`-Xsycl-target-backend` option and implied options based on the optional
device behaviors for AOT compilations for GPU new command line interfaces
are needed to pass along this information.

| Target | Triple        | Offline Tool   | Option for Additional Args |
|--------|---------------|----------------|----------------------------|
| CPU    | spir64_x86_64 | opencl-aot     | `--cpu-tool-arg=<arg>`     |
| GPU    | spir64_gen    | ocloc          | `--gen-tool-arg=<arg>`     |

> | FPGA   | spir64_fpga   | aoc/opencl-aot | `--fpga-tool-arg=<arg>`    |

Reviewer 4: I think the offline compiler is selected by the target triple.

> | FPGA   | spir64_fpga   | aoc/opencl-aot | `--fpga-tool-arg=<arg>`    |

Author: I have added some clarifying information.  The `clang-linker-wrapper` is responsible for full discovery of targets based on findings within the binaries.  https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/8658/commits/431dff74fc1640d4bd2a5c1d1150604d723392b9

step performed by sycl-post-link.  Additional options passed by the user
via the `-Xsycl-target-backend=spir64_gen <opts>` command as well as the
implied options set via target options such as `-fsycl-targets=intel_gpu_skl`
will be processed by a new options to the wrapper, `--gen-tool-arg=<arg>`

To support multiple target specifications, for instance:
`-fsycl-targets=intel_gpu_skl,intel_gpu_pvc`, multiple `--gen-tool-arg`
options can be passed on the command line.  Each instance will be considered
a separate OCLOC call passing along the `<args>` as options to the OCLOC call.
The compiler driver will be responsible for putting together the full option
list to be passed along.

> -fsycl -fsycl-targets=spir64_gen,intel_gpu_skl
-Xsycl-target-backend=spir64_gen "-device pvc -options -extraopt_pvc"
-Xsycl-target-backend=intel_gpu_skl "-options -extraopt_skl"

*Example: spir64_gen enabling options*

> --gen-tool-arg="-device pvc -options extraopt_pvc"
--gen-tool-arg="-device skl -options -extraopt_skl"

*Example: clang-linker-wrapper options*

Each OCLOC call will be represented as a separate device binary that is

> individually wrapped and linked into the final executable.

Reviewer 2: How does `clang-linker-wrapper` know how many times to invoke `ocloc`?  How does it know which GPU target is associated with each `ocloc` invocation?

Is the idea that `clang-linker-wrapper` will count the number of `--gen-tool-arg` options and parse the value to find the "-device pvc" part?

Would it make sense to change the syntax to make it easier to find the device name, something like:

```
--gen-tool-arg=pvc "-options extraopt_pvc"
```

Something else to keep in mind ... my thought is that we will change `sycl-post-link` to emit a separate device image for each GPU target.  This is another reason why `clang-linker-wrapper` will need to know the set of GPU targets.

Author: Good point - we will need to provide a way to differentiate more than just the arch (spir64_gen vs spir64_x86_64).  I like your idea of taking the known syntax of `-opt=<target> "opts"` which we currently use for `-Xsycl-target-backend`

The dependency information is only used when compiling for hardware.

The `clang-linker-wrapper` tool will be responsible to determine which FPGA
tool is being used during the AOT device compilation phase.  The use of
`-simulation` or `-hardware` as passed in by `--fpga-tool-arg` signifies
which tool is used.

#### spir64_x86_64 support

Compilation behaviors involving AOT for CPU involve an additional call to
`opencl-aot`.  This call occurs after the post-link step performed by
`sycl-post-link`.  Additional options passed by the user via the
`-Xsycl-target-backend=spir64_x86_64 <opts>` command will be processed by a new
option to the wrapper, `--cpu-tool-arg=<arg>`

### Wrapping of device image

Once the device binary is pulled out of the fat binary, the binary must be
wrapped and provided the needed entry points to be used during execution.  This
is performed by the during the link phase and controlled by the
`clang-linker-wrapper`.

It is expected that the wrap information that is generated to be wrapped
around the device binary will match current wrapping information that is used
for the exiting offload model.  The wrapping in the old model is using the

> `clang-offload-wrapper` tool.

Reviewer 2: In order to implement the AOT part of "optional kernel features", we need to somehow annotate each device binary with an identifier for its GPU target.  For example, a device binary created for `--gen-tool-arg=pvc` needs to be annotated as a "PVC" binary.  My thought was to use the GMDID for this annotation.

I think we currently annotate AOT binaries with `PI_DEVICE_BINARY_TYPE_NATIVE`.  Is this part of the "wrapping" you describe here?  Is there anything about this design that will make it difficult to change this to the GMDID?

Author: We would have to provide the GMDID mapping in the driver (and continue to update as new ID values come along) so when a user wants `intel_gpu_pvc` the GMDID will be used and embedded into corresponding information tagged with the device binary within the fat object.  When the `clang-linker-wrapper` is extracting, it will know to use the information as tagged accordingly to set the proper device with the `ocloc` call.

Reviewer 2: Rather than embedding the list of GMDID's in the driver, I think we can include the GMDID for each target in the device config file that we are designing (#9371).  Once that happens, the driver will use the config file information to determine the set of legal targets for `-fsycl-targets` and also get the associated GMDID from there.

> # Implementation design for offloading model

Reviewer 5: Can we reword the Topic to be more specific to what we cover here? "Updated offloading compilation flow using clang-linker-wrapper'? Maybe?

## Introduction

> This document covers the implementation design for using the new offloading

Reviewer 5: Not sure if we should call it 'implementation design'. May be 'proposed design'?

> This document covers the implementation design for using the new offloading

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This document covers the proposed design for using the new offloading
```

model for the DPC++ Compiler.  This leverages the existing community Offloading 
design [OffloadingDesign][1] which covers the Clang driver and code generation
steps for creating offloading applications.

[1]: <../../../clang/docs/OffloadingDesign.rst>

The current offloading model is completely encapsulated within the Clang
Compiler Driver requiring the driver to perform all of the additional steps
for generating the host and device compilation passes.  The Driver is also

> responsible for performing any of the link-time processing that occurs for

Reviewer 5: I think 'responsible for initiating...' sounds more appropriate?

> responsible for performing any of the link-time processing that occurs for

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
responsible for initiating any of the link-time processing that occurs for
```

each device target.

The updated offloading model removes much of the functionality that is

> performed during the link phase of the offloading compilation and moves it

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
performed during the link phase of the offloading compilation from the driver and moves it
```

to a `clang-linker-wrapper` tool.

Below is a general representation of the overall offloading flow that is
performed during a full compilation from source to final executable.  The
compiler driver is responsible for creating the fat object and the
`clang-linker-wrapper` tool is responsible for the general functionality that is
performed during the link.

![High level view of the offloading flow](images/OffloadGeneralFlow.svg
 "General Offload Flow")

*Diagram 1: General Offload Flow*

> More specific details of the clang-linker-wrapper behavior can be seen in the

Reviewer 5: This sentence can easily be removed without affecting the flow here. (nit)

[clang-linker-wrapper](#clang-linker-wrapper) section.

## Fat Binary Representation

> Binaries generated during the offload compilation will be 'bundled' together

Reviewer 5: Currently, this sub-section seems low on information. I suppose there is more info in the community 'offloading design' document? May be a link to that information can be useful. A modified version of that information embedded here may be even better.

Thanks

to create a conglomerate fat binary.  Depending on the type of binary, the
packaging of the device section will be different.

## Device only Binaries

> 

Reviewer 5: Same comment as the one for previous sub-section.

Author: Moved some of the information from these sub-sections to the device extraction section, as that covers the information relayed here.  Removed these sub sections as well.

Generation and consumption of device only binaries is also available.  The
device only binaries are represented by the file generated from the
[Packager](#packager) to generate an 'Offload Binary'.

## Fat Binary Generation

> The generation of the fat binary will take place in the driver.  The model from

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The generation of the fat binary will be controlled by the driver.  The model from
```

the community is generating the fat binary as a secondary process when creating
the host object.  Generation will be separated from the host compilation step.
This is being done to enable proper support for using an external host compiler
as well as taking advantage of potential parallelism during compilation of both
the host and target device binaries.

The fat object in the new model is generated during the host compilation.
The host compilation takes an additional argument which points to the device
binary which will be embedded in the final object.  Generation will be
separated out to allow for potential parallelism during compilation of both the
host and target device binaries.

![Creating the fat object](images/OffloadFatObject.svg
 "Fat Object Generation")

> *Diagram 2: Fat Object Generation*

Reviewer 5: In the diagram, I think there are two changes needed: (1) Show host compilation using a separate box and (2) Output of clang-offload-packager should go into the 'link' box. and the output of the link box.
This is based on my understanding. I may have missed something here.

Thanks

Author: I have updated the diagram to be a little clearer.  Not sure why there was a 'link' section as there is no linking when generating fat objects.

### Packager

When dealing with multiple device binaries, an additional step is performed to
package the multiple device binaries before being added to the host object.
This additional step is performed with the `clang-offload-packager` taking
image inputs containing information relating to the target triple,
architecture setting and offloading kind.

The `clang-offload-packager` is run during 'fat object' generation regardless
of the number of device binaries being added to the conglomerate fat object.
The device binaries are contained in what is designated as an ‘Offload Binary’.
These binaries can reside in a variety of binary formats including Bitcode
files, ELF objects, executables and shared objects, COFF objects, archives or
simply stored as an offload binary.

We should have the ability to package SPIR-V based device binaries in the
offload section of any given binary.  These device binaries will be packaged

> as normal with the packager and placed within the given section.

Reviewer 5: Can we add an example usage of clang-offload-packager here?

Thanks

Author: simple example added (command line usage)

## Clang Linker Wrapper

The clang-linker-wrapper provides the interface to perform the needed link
steps when consuming fat binaries.  The linker wrapper performs a majority of

> the work involved during the link step during an offload compilation,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
the work involved during the link step of an offload compilation,
```

> significantly reducing the amount of work that is occuring in the compiler

Reviewer 5: If possible, can we add a few pointers about benefits of using the clang-linker-wrapper? (1) Simplify driver logic etc.

Thanks

`clang-offload-bundler` usage.  We will not support a mixing of fat object
formats such as objects created with the bundler combined with embedded objects
in a single archive or objects created with an embedded offload section and
additional sections generated with the bundler.

### Device Linking

During this phase, all of the individual device binaries that are extracted and
are associated with a given target are worked on given the type of binary we
are working with.  The default device code is typically represented in LLVM-IR
which requires an additional link step of the device code before being
wrapped and integrated into the final executable.  As mentioned in
[Packager](#packager) device representation in SPIR-V should be considered
with the ability to link native SPIR-V modules.  Performing the device link
against LLVM-IR is performed by `llvm-link`.

To reduce the potential size of the linked device binary, an additional host
link step is performed to gather dependency information when static device
libraries are being compiled.  This information is sent through the
`clang-offload-deps` tool to generate a dependency IR file which is used
during the device link step.

> The use of the clang-linker-wrapper introduces the support of LTO for

Reviewer 5: It seems like we need to have 'registered SPIR backend' if we want to use LTO for SPIR targeted IR. How will we accomplish this? Adding @bader here for comments.

Thanks

Reviewer 4: > It seems like we need to have 'registered SPIR backend' if we want to use LTO for SPIR targeted IR. How will we accomplish this?

LLVM has SPIR-V experimental backend (https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/tree/main/llvm/lib/Target/SPIRV). We can use this backend.
AFAIK, this backend doesn't support all extensions required for DPC++. To mitigate this problem, we can use SPIR-V translator the same ptxas is used for NVPTX target.

device code.  We can leverage this and move away from the dependency gathering
information step with 'clang-offload-deps' and use thinLTO for device code.

> There are multiple device linking steps that also occur.  The first step links

Reviewer 5: Do we do this in current offloading model? Thanks

Author: The use of `clang-offload-deps` is performed with the current model.  From there, we do perform multiple device linking steps - first linking in all of the input objects from the user and the second which pulls in the device libraries and static archives using `--only-needed`

The device libraries that are pulled in during the device link step will need
to be controlled by the `clang-linker-wrapper`.  There is a controlling option
(`-fno-sycl-device-lib=arg`) that is available to the user which needs to be
provided to the wrapper to give more control over what device libraries are
pulled in during the device link.

### Post-link and SPIR-V translation

After the device binaries are linked together, two additional steps are
performed to prepare the device binary for consumption by an offline compilation
tool for AOT or to be wrapped for JIT processing.

The `sycl-post-link` tool is used after the device link is performed,
applying any changes such as optimizations and code splitting before passing
off to the `llvm-spirv` tool, which translates the LLVM-IR to SPIR-V.

At this point, the SPIR-V binary is sent to the Ahead of Time compilation
step to produce the final device binary or is wrapped before being linked into
the final executable.

### Ahead Of Time Compilation

The updated offloading model will integrate the Ahead of Time (AOT) compilation
behaviors into the clang-linker-wrapper.  The actions will typically take place

> after the device link and post link steps.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
after the device link, post link, and LLVM-IR to SPIR-V translation steps.
```

to create the image.

To support the needed option passing triggered by use of the
`-Xsycl-target-backend` option and implied options based on the optional
device behaviors for AOT compilations for GPU new command line interfaces
are needed to pass along this information.

| Target | Triple        | Offline Tool   | Option for Additional Args |
|--------|---------------|----------------|----------------------------|
| CPU    | spir64_x86_64 | opencl-aot     | `--cpu-tool-arg=<arg>`     |
| GPU    | spir64_gen    | ocloc          | `--gen-tool-arg=<arg>`     |
| FPGA   | spir64_fpga   | aoc/opencl-aot | `--fpga-tool-arg=<arg>`    |

*Table: Ahead of Time Info*

To complete the support needed for the various targets using the
`clang-linker-wrapper` as the main interface, a few additional options will
be needed to communicate from the driver to the tool.  Further details of usage
are given further below.

| Option Name                  | Purpose                                      |
|------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| `--fpga-link-type=<arg>`     | Tells the link step to perform 'early' or 'image' processing to create archives for FPGA |

> | `--parallel-link-sycl=<arg>` | Provide the number of parallel jobs that will be used when processing with `llvm-foreach` |

Reviewer 5: Do we want to use llvm-foreach? I think we should be able to use parallel for constructs in LLVM.

Author: Modified usage of llvm-foreach to state we are moving away from it, as we can dynamically adjust the calling tools within `clang-linker-wrapper`

| `--no-sycl-device-lib=<arg>` | Provide the list of device libraries to restrict from linking during device link |

*Table: Additional Options for clang-linker-wrapper*

The `clang-linker-wrapper` provides an existing option named `-wrapper-jobs`
that may be useful for our usage instead of creating a new option specific
to `llvm-foreach` processing.

#### spir64_gen support

Compilation behaviors involving AOT for GPU involve an additional call to

> the OpenCL Offline compiler (OCLOC).  This call occurs after the post-link

Reviewer 5: Are we missing the LLVM to SPIR-V translation step here and in sections below? Please check.

Thanks

debug generation and also generate dependency information.  The dependency
generation should be packaged along with the device binary for use during
the link phase.  It is expected that the full fat object, containing host,
device and dependency file is generated before being passed to the link phase.
The dependency information is only used when compiling for hardware.

The `clang-linker-wrapper` tool will be responsible to determine which FPGA
tool is being used during the AOT device compilation phase.  The use of
`-simulation` or `-hardware` as passed in by `--fpga-tool-arg` signifies
which tool is used.

#### spir64_x86_64 support

Compilation behaviors involving AOT for CPU involve an additional call to
`opencl-aot`.  This call occurs after the post-link step performed by
`sycl-post-link`.  Additional options passed by the user via the
`-Xsycl-target-backend=spir64_x86_64 <opts>` command will be processed by a new
option to the wrapper, `--cpu-tool-arg=<arg>`

### Wrapping of device image

Once the device binary is pulled out of the fat binary, the binary must be
wrapped and provided the needed entry points to be used during execution.  This

> is performed by the during the link phase and controlled by the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
is performed during the link phase and is controlled by the
```

`clang-linker-wrapper`.

It is expected that the wrap information that is generated to be wrapped
around the device binary will match current wrapping information that is used

> for the exiting offload model.  The wrapping in the old model is using the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
for the existing offload model.  The wrapping in the old model is using the
```

state of commands.

Moving the functionality into `clang-linker-wrapper` presents the opportunity
step away from the static command construction and create the call chain on
the fly based on real time output from corresponding tools being called.

### Host Link

The final host link is also performed by the linker wrapper.  This link is
built upon the full link command line as constructed by the compiler driver,
including all libraries and the linked/wrapped device binaries to complete the
compilation process.

The provided command line for the final host link step contains the full list
of libraries and objects to be linked against.  The expectation is for this
list to be complete.  With the old model, the host objects are directly passed
to the host link step.  The device objects are processed separately.  As we are
passing the full command line to the link step, the objects provided will need
to be full fat objects.  This is different from the old model which will
require for an additional step before the link to create the full fat object
that is properly represented on the host link command line.  This additional

> step is necessary due the fact that we are creating the fat objects during

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
step is necessary due to the fact that we are creating the fat objects during
```

`clang-offload-deps` tool to generate a dependency IR file which is used
during the device link step.

The use of the clang-linker-wrapper introduces the support of LTO for
device code.  We can leverage this and move away from the dependency gathering
information step with 'clang-offload-deps' and use thinLTO for device code.

There are multiple device linking steps that also occur.  The first step links
together all of the objects and the required device libraries.  The second is
performed including all of optional device libraries, the static device
libraries and the dependency information that was gathered above.  This link
step is performed with `--only-needed` to streamline the final device binary.

A list of device libraries that need to linked in with user code is provided by
the driver.  The driver is also responsible for letting the
`clang-linker-wrapper` know the location of the device libraries.

|            Option                    |   Expected Behavior   |
|--------------------------------------|-----------------------|
| `--sycl-device-libraries=<arg>`      | A comma separated list of device libraries that are linked during the device link. |

> | `--device-library-location=<arg>`    | The location in which the device libraries reside |

Reviewer 5: Sorry. Missd this earlier. Can we pls name this --sycl-device-library-location ?

Thanks

Author: Done.

libraries and the dependency information that was gathered above.  This link
step is performed with `--only-needed` to streamline the final device binary.

> The device libraries that are linked in is provided by the driver.  The driver

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A list of device libraries that need to linked in with user code is provided by the driver.  The driver
```

> is responsible for letting the `clang-linker-wrapper` know what device libraries

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
is also responsible for letting the `clang-linker-wrapper` know what device libraries
```

> are required to be linked in as well as the location.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

> The device libraries that are linked in is provided by the driver.  The driver
> is responsible for letting the `clang-linker-wrapper` know what device libraries
> are required to be linked in as well as the location.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A list of device libraries that need to linked in with user code is provided by the driver.  The driver is also responsible for letting the `clang-linker-wrapper` know the location of the device libraries.
```

|            Option                    |   Expected Behavior   |
|--------------------------------------|-----------------------|
| `--sycl-device-libraries=<arg>`      | A comma separated list of device libraries that are linked during the device link. |

> | `--sycl-device-libraries-full=<arg>` | A comma separated list of device libraries that are linked during the first device link.  These libraries are required in full and should not be impacted by use of `--only-needed` |

Reviewer 5: Do we need this option? Can you please specify example of files do we expect to pass here? Thanks

Author: @asudarsa, the libraries here are the ones that are part of the first `llvm-link` call which does not use `--only-needed`.  Basically device libraries that are required in full.  Perhaps this isn't needed for SYCL though but more for OpenMP.  I'll clean this out here.

> | `--device-library-location=<arg>`    | The location in which the device libraries reside to be used during compilation |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| `--device-library-location=<arg>`    | The location in which the device libraries reside |
```

> *Table: Options to control device libraries*

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
*Table: Options to pass device libraries to the clang-linker-wrapper*
```

> The device libraries are controlled via the `-fno-sycl-device-lib=arg` option
> where the driver determines based on this option which libraries to tell the
> linker wrapper to pull in.

Reviewer 5: IIUC
```suggestion
The driver also passes `-fno-sycl-device-lib=arg` option to the clang-linker-wrapper. This option is used to determine the exact set of device libraries that need to be pulled in.
```

Author: This shouldn't be passed to the linker wrapper.  As the driver controls what device libraries are to be linked in, the driver can determine which ones are associated to the `-fno-sycl-device-lib` option.

| Option Name                  | Purpose                                      |
|------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| `--fpga-link-type=<arg>`     | Tells the link step to perform 'early' or 'image' processing to create archives for FPGA |
| `--parallel-link-sycl=<arg>` | Provide the number of parallel jobs that will be used when processing split jobs |

> | `--no-sycl-device-lib=<arg>` | Provide the list of device libraries to restrict from linking during device link |

Reviewer 5: Do we want to repeat this option here?

Author: This corresponds to the 'list' of device libraries which are now controlled by the driver.  I will remove this.
